---
layout: post
title: peggy—PEG parsing in Python
---
This morning, to scratch an itch[^pypeg], I wrote a [PEG implementation
in Python][peggy].

I took a bit of an unusual approach to it, which I'll explain here and I
hope you may find interesting.

I am, I confess, a Haskell programmer on the sly. Haskell is quite
interesting for giving one a bit of a different perspective on how code
should look.

In particular, here, the design process for the imperative mindset is to
ask what a parser _does_. I think what's an interesting alternative
approach is the declarative mindset, where we ask what a parser _is_.

To a first approximation, a parser is this (if you'll forgive the
Haskell syntax):

{% highlight haskell %}
type Parser a = String -> Maybe (a, String)
{% endhighlight %}

Transliterating this to English: a parser which parses `String`s to `a`s
is: a function which takes an `a` and returns *either* an `a` and the
rest of the unparsed input, or nothing (in case of a parse error).

In Haskell, this takes the shape of a stack of monad transformers.
Indeed, if we restate that type with some newtype wrappers:

{% highlight haskell %}
type Parser = StateT String Maybe
{% endhighlight %}

We get most of the functionality we want "for free". If we throw in the
following extra utility function:

{% highlight haskell %}
dot :: Parser Char
dot = do (x:xs) <- get
         put xs
         return x
{% endhighlight %}

That's enough for the majority of basic parsing[^preds].

Sequencing is achieved through `<*>` and `>>` which both come with the
Applicative instance for `StateT String Maybe`. Ordered choice and empty
come from `<|>` and `empty` in the Alternative instance for `StateT
String Maybe`. In fact, the `?`, `+` and `*` operators also come from
the `Alternative` instance as `optional`, `some` and `many`.

I think this makes rather a nice example for Haskell: a pretty full
set of parsing combinators in five lines of code, one of which is just type
signature.

Python
------

I wanted to translate this formulation into Python to produce a
relatively small and clean PEG implementation. The basic idea was a
`Parser` wrapper class around these parser functions.

A Python parser function here is one that takes an input string and
either:

* Returns a `(parsed value, residue)` tuple, or
* Throws a `ParseError`.

The other combinators can all be built up from that basic building
block.

[The implementation][peggy-impl] is about 140 lines of Python.

[^pypeg]: [PyPEG][pypeg], the current state-of-the-art Python PEG
          library, is full-featured but rather unwieldy in my opinion.

[^preds]: This is not complete for PEGs as it is missing the `&` and
          `!`-predicates.

[peggy]: https://github.com/prophile/peggy
[peggy-impl]: https://github.com/prophile/peggy/blob/master/peggy/__init__.py
[pypeg]: http://fdik.org/pyPEG/

