---
layout: post
title: Jekyll
---
I have a blog now!

It's been my intention to set up my website for some time, but as you can
probably imagine the hunt for work has brought me to finally setting it up.

As those of you with an eye for design will immediately notice, you are much
more talented than me. I started out with an idea of just making my front page
an analogue of a business card (very minimal!) and everything went from there.

I went for a deep dive into the world of semantic markup. The HTML is actually
very minimal and just contains the content, CSS is doing all the heavy lifting:
even adding the Twitter bird to the front of my twitter handle.

I wanted to keep the site JavaScript-free since while I'm not a fan of people
turning off JavaScript it does seem somewhat excessive to need JavaScript for a
site containing just static content. What I did discover from that, however, is
that it's possible (though I didn't) to do fold-out animations and collapsible
sections without any involvement of JavaScript using deep CSS3 transition magic.

Something along the lines of:

{% highlight css %}
.container .detail {
  transition: height 0.4s;
  height: 0;
}

.container:hover .detail {
  height: 10em;
}
{% endhighlight %}

will expand elements with the class `detail` inside `container` when the
`container` is hovered over.

I'm certain that the design of the website will change as I come to terms with
just how awful I've made this first cut at it, but for now I'm fairly satisfied.

